Garlic Bread
blah
Ingredients
1 small French stick
50g margarine
2 cloves crushed garlic
15ml spoon chopped parsley
Equipment
Foil, garlic press, small bowl, chopping board,
bread knife, spreading knife and mixing spoon
Method
1. Preheat oven to 200oC, gas mark 6.
2. Mix margarine, garlic and parsley together in a
small bowl.
3. Cut the French stick into slices.
4. Spread garlic butter onto each slice.
5. Wrap the stick in foil.
6. Place in the oven and bake for 10 minutes.
7. Peel foil back and bake for a further 5 minutes until crunchy.
© British Nutrition Foundation 2005


Recipe

Serves

18

3-4

Garlic Bread
Ingredients
1 small French stick
50g (2oz) butter or margarine
2 cloves garlic
1x15ml spoon (1 Tablespoon) parsley,
chopped (optional)

Equipment
Foil, garlic press, small bowl,
chopping board and knife.

Method
1.

Preheat the oven to 200oC or Gas Mark 6.

2. Mix the butter or margarine, garlic and parsley together in a small bowl.
3.

Cut slices into the French stick about a third of the way down.

4. Spread the garlic butter onto each slice.
5. Wrap the stick in foil.
6. Bake for 10 minutes.
7.

Peel the foil back and bake for a further 5 minutes until crunchy.

Key Messages

Nutrition Information
Garlic Bread

per 100g

per recipe per portion
(1/3 recipe)

Healthy eating

•
Money
•

Use a reduced fat spread instead of butter or margarine, but make
sure it is suitable for baking.

Energy (kJ)

1372

4883

1628

Energy (kcal)

328

1167

389

Protein (g)

7.8

27.8

9.3

Fat (g)

13.1

46.8

15.6

Food safety

of which saturates (g)

7.6

27.1

9.0

•

Carbohydrate (g)

47.6

169.6

56.5

of which sugars (g)

2.5

8.8

2.9

Fibre (g)

2.1

7.4

2.5

Sodium (mg)

604

2151

717

Salt (g)

1.5

5.4

1.8

Notes

© Crown copyright 2005

Day old French sticks, which are usually reduced in price in
supermarkets, can be used to make garlic bread. These could be
frozen for future use.

Always keep butter and margarine in the fridge.

HOME MADE GARLIC BREAD
INGREDIENTS


550 g cake flour
1 packet or 10 grams instant yeast
40 grams sugar
40 grams soft  butter
10 grams salt
1 cup luke warm water
½ cup crushed garlic
Pinch crushed black pepper
4 teaspoons chopped parsley
50ml olive oil
2 teaspoons rock salt
250g/half block butter softened

METHOD
•	 Pre heat your oven to 175 degrees Celsius as well as greasing a large baking tray with spray & cook or butter.
•	 In a large clean mixing bowl place all the dry ingredients & the soft butter.  Gently mix together by hand until the
	 butter is well incorporated with the dry ingredients.
•	 Make a well in the centre of the mixing bowl & pour in the water.
•	 Only use one hand to mix the ingredients together at this stage.
•	 Once it has started combining together place your dough onto a clean work surface that has been lightly floured.
•	 Mix the dough together using both hands, what you will be doing is pulling the dough towards you with one
	 hand & folding it into itself with the other.
•	 Continue doing this until a smooth ball is formed.
•	 If the dough is too wet add more flour, if it is too dry add more water. Just keep in mind to add a little bit at a time
	 or else you could end up making it too dry or too wet.
•	 The dough should feel soft & smooth once completed.
•	 This would take anywhere from 5-10 minutes, all depending how experienced you are when it comes to making
	 bread dough by hand.
•	 Once the dough is ready to be used halve the mixture.
•	 Flour a work surface & lay out your dough, keep the other half of the dough mixture covered to prevent it from
	 drying out.
•	 You are now going to shape your dough by hand in order to make a ‘loaf ’.
•	 Do so by rolling it out by hand on a surface  & making a cylinder like shape
•	 Place the loaves onto your greased baking tray.
•	 Your next step is to cover the baking tray with cling wrap-or foil if you don’t have any cling wrap.

HOME MADE GARLIC BREAD
•	 You are going to allow the bread dough to proof-letting it double in size, allowing it to be light & fluffy.  It is best
	 to try proof it in a warm area of the kitchen.
•	 Let it proof for 15-20 minutes or until the loaves have doubled in size.
•	 You will notice the dough is a lot softer as well after proofing.
•	 Remove the plastic wrap or foil once the dough has proofed enough.
•	 Place in the preheated oven & bake for 10 minutes, the bread should be golden brown on the outside & when you
	 stick a toothpick or knife into it in order to check the bread it should come out clean-no raw dough sticking to it.
•	 Once the breads are cooked remove from the oven & leave to cool.
•	 Once cooled down you can start slicing into them, making sure to not cut all the way through. Just enough so you
	 can put enough filling in each compartment.
•	 Mix your butter, parsley, black pepper & pinch of rock salt together to make a paste.
•	 In each compartment place a little bit of your butter mix, using a knife to spread it evenly in on all sides. Try to
	 put as much filling in each slit as possible.
•	 Once you have filled both of the loaves try & rub the outside of each loaf with any of the remaining butter mix.
•	 Take a large amount of foil & tear off a rectangular shaped piece -the foil should be much wider & longer in
	 diameter than your breads. You will also need to tear two pieces as you have two loaves of garlic bread.
•	 Rub it with your olive oil & sprinkle some rock salt along the surface
•	 Place one loaf on one rectangle of foil; rub the top of the bread with some more olive oil & a sprinkle of rock salt.
•	 Fold the foil over the loaf in order to completely cover it. & make sure to seal any open areas.
•	 Your garlic bread is now ready to bake.
•	 Just keep it in the fridge till ready for use & then bake in a preheated oven at 180 degrees Celsius for 5-10 mi
nutes.



Garlic bread (also garlic toast) consists of bread (usually a baguette or sour dough like a ciabatta), topped with garlic and olive oil or butter and may include additional herbs, like chives. It is then either grilled or broiled until toasted or baked in a conventional or bread oven.

It is typically made using a French baguette, or sometimes a sourdough like ciabatta which is partially sliced downwards, allowing the condiments to soak into the loaf while keeping it in one piece. The bread is then stuffed through the cuts with oil and minced garlic before baking. Alternatively, butter and garlic powder are used, or the bread is cut lengthwise into separate slices which are individually garnished.

Some variants are topped with a variety of cheeses, often mozzarella, cheddar or feta. Some restaurants use clarified butter in place of olive oil.

JamieOliver

Ingredients
800 g strong bread flour , plus extra for dusting
1 x 7 g sachet of dried yeast
100 g stale breadcrumbs
FOR THE BUTTER:
1 bulb of garlic
500 g unsalted butter , (at room temperature)
1 lemon
1 bunch of fresh flat-leaf parsley , (30g)
1 level teaspoon cayenne pepper

Method
Put the flour, yeast and 1 teaspoon of sea salt into a large bowl and make a well in the middle. Gradually pour in 550ml of tepid water, continuously stirring and bringing in the flour from the outside as you go to form a rough dough.
Transfer to a flour-dusted surface and knead for 10 minutes, or until smooth and springy. Place in a bowl, cover with a damp tea towel and prove in a warm place for 1 hour, or until doubled in size.
Meanwhile, make the butter – this is a big batch, to make good use of your time, and you can freeze the extra for rainy days. Use a garlic crusher to crush the garlic into the softened butter, finely grate over the zest of ½ a lemon, finely chop and add the parsley (stalks and all), the cayenne and a pinch of salt, then mix it all together.
Remove one quarter to use in this recipe, then place the rest on a sheet of greaseproof paper, roll it up into a log and twist the ends like a Christmas cracker, then pop into the freezer.
After 30 minutes, get the butter out and slice it up to pre-portion, then re-roll and return to the freezer, where it will keep very happily for up to 6 months.
Spread one third of your soft butter portion all around the base and sides of a large metal tray (25cm x 35cm), then scatter in the breadcrumbs and shake around into an even layer so they stick to the butter.
Divide up the dough into 35 pieces, then, one-by-one, roll each one into a ball and place in the tray in rows – 5 balls across and 7 balls long is perfect.
Bomb over another third of the soft butter, in and around the balls. Leave to prove for another 1 hour 30 minutes, or until doubled in size again.
Preheat the oven to 190ºC/375ºF/gas 5.
Sprinkle the balls with a little salt, then bake on the bottom shelf of the oven for 30 minutes, or until lovely and golden.
Bomb over that final third of your soft butter and spread it around to give the bread a beautiful shine.
Whack the tray in the middle of the table or at the centre of your picnic for sharing, and let everyone tear off their own pieces.


Anyone who says they don't like garlic bread must be fibbing" declare the authors of retro recipe bible The Prawn Cocktail Years – and, as usual, I'm in complete agreement. Hot and crisp from the oven, sodden with rich, punchy butter, it's the pleasure that never, ever palls. Even the plastic-wrapped supermarket version, pallid yet powerful, has its tawdry charms: it seems garlic butter can do no wrong.

That said, not all members of the pungent pantheon are created equal: Nigel Slater's quite outrageously good parmesan garlic bread has been closest to my heart for some many years now – and has sustained many, many house parties over the years: a burnt tongue being apparently a small price to pay for seizing the first slice from the steaming foil, especially after a few drinks – but could there be something even better lurking quietly out there in a pool of delicious grease? The Pandora's box of possibility finally opened, I can't stop until I'm satisfied I've tasted the best garlic bread has to offer me.

Bread: droves of loaves
 Nigella garlic and parsley haerthbread
 Nigella's recipe garlic and parsley hearthbread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
Nigel uses a baguette, the classic British choice. Jamie Oliver goes for a garlic pizza in Jamie's Italy, Nigella has something called a garlic and parsley "hearthbread" in How to be a Domestic Goddess, Giorgio Locatelli gives a recipe for a confit garlic foccacia in Made in Italy, and America's legendary Barefoot Contessa, Ina Garten, uses ciabatta. So it's fair to say that there's a diversity of opinion on the matter of bread.

Having made them all, I'd say the most important thing for garlic bread is the softness of crumb. Although it shouldn't quite be soggy, it should be up to the job of absorbing obscene amounts of garlic butter. This rules out Jamie's pizza base, which, as modernity dictates, is thin and crisp: there's just nowhere for the garlic to go. Although Locatelli doesn't use garlic butter (of which more later), foccacia doesn't seem right either: it's too soft for anything more than olive oil. Nigella's hearthbread has potential, although as she smears the garlic on top, it doesn't really penetrate the bread.

Best are Nigel's baguette and Garten's ciabatta: the former doing its usual excellent job of turning itself into a buttery, parsley-flecked sponge, and the latter offering a bit more structure, which I traitorously enjoy.

Garlic: a light bulb moment
 Fettunta (a type of garlic bread)
 Fettunta, as recommended by Elaine McCardel. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
Next up, there's the garlic issue. Nigel, my point of reference on all things garlic bread related, uses crushed raw garlic, mashed into butter and baked, and Jamie smashes a couple of cloves with olive oil and drizzles them over the top of the pizza. Elaine McCardel, author of The Italian Dish blog, rubs grilled bread with a cut garlic clove to make something called a fettunta which is surprisingly tasty, but unapologetically harsh: not quite the result I'm after.

Everyone else cooks their garlic before use. Garten drops it into hot olive oil before using it, to slightly neutralise the flavour, while Nigella roasts the garlic until soft before puréeing it and adding it to the top of her hearthbread. This seems to me to miss the point of garlic bread or, at least, the kind of garlic bread I'm seeking: I have no doubt Nigella is a woman who also appreciates the joys of a good old-school baguette. The sweetness of a baked bulb is undeniably delicious, but garlic bread should pack a punch, and this doesn't. The same goes for Locatelli's confit garlic, which is simmered in milk and sugar until sticky and almost jammy: it's lovely, but it doesn't hit the spot. I'm going to stick with raw garlic, crushed or finely chopped, to release the juices and spread the flavour through the butter or oil as far as possible.

The vehicle
 Georgio Locatelli's recipe confit garlic foccacia
 Georgio Locatelli's recipe confit garlic foccacia. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
Apart from the fettunta and Giorgio Locatelli's foccacia, which both deploy garlic in a different form, it's customary for the garlic to come in a hefty dollop of fat, which is one of the reasons why garlic bread is so very delicious. (This is also the reason that I decide not to try Dan Lepard's recipe, lovely as it looks: it's not the kind of garlic bread I seek.) Nigel and Richard Bertinet go for butter. Jamie and Nigella both opt for olive oil, and Garten uses a mixture, spreading the bread generously with butter, then topping it with garlic and herbs in olive oil. Oil, to my taste, simply makes the bread seem greasy: it's great for dipping, but it doesn't seem to soak into the bread in the same way as butter – I've probably just got hopelessly rich Anglo-Saxon tastes, but for me, it's butter all the way.

The marriage
 Jamie Oliver recipe garlic pizza
 Jamie Oliver recipe garlic pizza. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
Now we come to the blessed union of the two ingredients. I've already dismissed Jamie and Nigella's method of spreading the garlic paste on top, which not only stops it soaking into the bread, but also, in Nigella's case, gives it a slightly acrid flavour. Locatelli's complex folding process won't work for garlic butter. Bertinet, who's using thick slices of leftover bread, spreads it on top and bakes "until the butter has melted and the bread is golden", which is nice, but leads to a lot of leakage (to spill garlic butter on to barren ground is surely a sin) while Nigel, using a whole loaf, cuts it into half slices in the classic fashion, and stuffs each with butter until it squeaks. Garten, presumably for ease because ciabattas are traditionally rather flat, demands that the bread should be sliced laterally which, thanks to the workings of gravity means that the bottom half of each slice is saturated, and the top fluffy and disappointingly innocent of garlic. This should not be a bite of two halves.

Extras
 Nigel Slater recipe garlic bread
 Nigel Slater recipe garlic bread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
Fortunately, few people seem to have dared to mess with perfection. Nigel adds generous amounts of grated parmesan to his garlic butter, so that "the cheese form[s] thin strings as you tear one piece of bread from the next". Although not classic, the cheese acts as seasoning, so I think it's allowable, mostly because leaving it out might mean my friend Ian, a garlic bread maker supreme who once produced 14 Slater loaves in 20 minutes for a Christmas party, never speaks to me again.

Garten uses a half and half mix of oregano and parsley, which I don't like: the herbs shouldn't be too assertive here, and oregano doesn't go with butter in my opinion. Bertinet adds a squeeze of lemon juice, which I really like: while cutting through the richness of the butter would be nothing short of a crime here, a slight tang works brilliantly with the parsley and garlic. He also prefers curly to flat-leaf parsley for garlic bread, but in this case, I can't really tell the difference. Although be warned, neither it or the lemon will be enough to give you fresh breath afterwards.

Perfect garlic bread
 Felicity's perfect garlic bread
 Felicity's perfect garlic bread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake
1 ciabatta loaf (Richard Bertinet has an excellent recipe in his book Crust)
100g salted butter, at room temperature
4 cloves of garlic, crushed
Small bunch of whichever parsley you prefer, finely chopped
40g parmesan, grated, plus a little extra for topping
Squeeze of lemon juice

Advertisement

1. Preheat the oven to 220C. Very carefully cut the ciabatta into slices, making sure not to go right through, and put it in the middle of a piece of foil large enough to wrap around it.

2. Beat together the other ingredients, apart from the extra parmesan until well combined, then gently force the butter between the slices (this will be messy, but it's well worth it). Sprinkle the top of the loaf with the remaining cheese, and seal the foil around the loaf.

3. Bake for about 20 minutes, then open the foil and bake for another five minutes, and devour as soon as it's cool enough to handle.

Is garlic bread the savoury equivalent of chocolate brownies – the food everyone likes, or is there someone out there who can resist its charms? Are you an old-school supermarket baguette fan, or do you prefer a simple Italian-style toast? And honestly, is there any such thing as too much garlic?